README.md, before:

# Environment-Based Drupal Settings
This package extends Symfony's [symfony/dotenv](https://symfony.com/components/Dotenv)
component to allow streamlined Drupal config via [Environment Variables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environment_variable).
Please refer to the Symfony component's documentation about how `.env` files
should be used. It is important to note that `.env` files are _ignored_ if the
`APP_ENV` var has already been set by the server. For performance purposes,
production environments should ideally rely on pre-configured environment variables,
rather than environment variable values loaded from `.env` files.

## Installation

`composer require unleashedtech/dotenv-drupal`

### Configuring Drupal
First, you'll need to configure Drupal to use this package.

#### Drupal Settings & Sites Files
Drupal is typically configured via `settings.php` files in various directories.
To use this package with Drupal, some code will need to be added to the top of
the relevant `settings.php` file(s):

```php
<?php
use UnleashedTech\Drupal\Dotenv\Dotenv;
$dotenv = $dotenv ?? new Dotenv();
$config = $dotenv->getConfig();
$databases = $dotenv->getDatabases();
$settings = $dotenv->getSettings();
```

##### Conditional Logic
If conditional logic is required for a given site, such logic is still supported.
This package will auto-load various `settings.{{environment}}.php`,
`config.{{environment}}.php` or `databases.{{environment}}.php` files, if they exist.
For instance, if you need to set a database prefix for staging, you can create
`databases.staging.php`:

```php
<?php
$databases['default']['default']['prefix'] = 'foo_';
```

Each included file only has the related variable in scope
(e.g. `config.dev.php` only has `$config` in scope).

##### Multi-Site Drupal
You can use the `default` settings file to provide base configuration for
a multi-site install:

```php
<?php
use UnleashedTech\Drupal\Dotenv\Dotenv;
$dotenv = new Dotenv();
$dotenv->setSiteName(basename(__DIR__));
require __DIR__ . '/../default/settings.php';
```

If you'd like, you can manually set the database name for each site via the
`setDatabaseName` method:

```php
<?php
use UnleashedTech\Drupal\Dotenv\Dotenv;
$dotenv = new Dotenv();
$dotenv->setSiteName(basename(__DIR__));
$dotenv->setDatabaseName('foo');
require __DIR__ . '/../default/settings.php';
```

###### Using the Multi-Site Default Site
If you need to use the `default` site as part of your multi-site install,
you can allow it by calling the `DotEnv::setMultiSiteDefaultSiteAllowed` method
in `default/settings.php`:

```php
<?php
use UnleashedTech\Drupal\Dotenv\Dotenv;
$dotenv = $dotenv ?? new Dotenv();
$dotenv->setMultiSiteDefaultSiteAllowed();
$config = $dotenv->getConfig();
$databases = $dotenv->getDatabases();
$settings = $dotenv->getSettings();
```

###### Sites Files
This package also provides functionality to configure Drupal's `$sites` variable
via `sites.php`. The `$sites` variable is built from data in the [DOMAINS](#domains)
& [SITES](#sites) environment variables. You will need to add the following code
to `sites.php`:

```php
<?php
use UnleashedTech\Drupal\Dotenv\Dotenv;
$dotenv = new Dotenv();
$sites = $dotenv->getSites();
```

#### Installation Conclusion
That's it! Drupal will now attempt to load essential connection information from
Environment Variables.

### Configuring Drupal via ENV Variables
This package will provide many default setting & configuration values based on the
detected environment. Some of these values can be populated by environment variables.

Environment variables can be set in `.env` files, or via modifying server configuration.
For production environments, environment variables should ideally be defined via server
configuration.

Multi-site installations often need config that differs from the default site.
This package first checks for variables following the `{{ app }}__{{ site }}__{{ var }}`
naming convention, before falling back to the `{{ var }}` naming convention.

You can provide site-specific information via namespaced environment variables.

* [DATABASE_URL](#database_url)
* [FILE_PUBLIC_PATH](#file_public_path)
* [FILE_PRIVATE_PATH](#file_private_path)
* [FILE_TEMP_PATH](#file_temp_path)
* [CONFIG_SYNC_PATH](#config_sync_path)
* [DOMAINS](#domains)
* [MAILGUN_URL](#mailgun_url)
* [PUBLIC](#public)
* [SALT](#salt)
* [SITES](#sites)
* [SOLR_URL](#solr_url)
* [TRUSTED_HOST_PATTERNS](#trusted_host_patterns)
* More configuration options coming soon!

#### DATABASE_URL
The default database connection can be configured via a [DSN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_source_name):

```dotenv
DATABASE_URL=driver://user:password@host:port/database
```

For example:

```dotenv
DATABASE_URL=mysql://foo:bar@localhost:3306/baz
```

For multi-site installations, do _not_ specify a database name nor credentials in
the `DATABASE_URL` variable:

```dotenv
DATABASE_URL=mysql://localhost:3306
```

For an "earth" Drupal App with a "default" site & an "antarctica" site:
```dotenv
DATABASE_URL=mysql://localhost:3306

EARTH__DEFAULT__DATABASE_USER=foo
EARTH__DEFAULT__DATABASE_PASSWORD=bar

EARTH__ANTARCTICA__DATABASE_USER=baz
EARTH__ANTARCTICA__DATABASE_PASSWORD=qux
```

The default Drupal [App Name](#app-name) is "default". For most use cases, you'll want to set the
Drupal [App Name](#app-name) in the default `settings.php` file, as shown below:
```php
<?php
use UnleashedTech\Drupal\Dotenv\Dotenv;
$dotenv = $dotenv ?? new Dotenv();
$dotenv->setAppName('earth');
// ...
```

#### FILE_PUBLIC_PATH
Allows you to override the default `$settings['file_public_path']` value:

```dotenv
FILE_PUBLIC_PATH=sites/all/files
```

Drupal expects this path to be _relative_ to `DRUPAL_ROOT`.

#### FILE_PRIVATE_PATH
Allows you to override the default `$settings['file_private_path']` value:

```dotenv
FILE_PRIVATE_PATH=/private
```

#### FILE_TEMP_PATH
Allows you to override the default `$settings['file_temp_path']` value:

```dotenv
FILE_TEMP_PATH=/tmp
```

#### CONFIG_SYNC_PATH
Allows you to override the default `$settings['config_sync_path']` value:

```dotenv
CONFIG_SYNC_PATH=/sync
```

#### DOMAINS
A CSV list of domains used by the given environment:

```dotenv
DOMAINS=foo.example,bar.example,baz.example
```

#### MAILGUN_URL
The information Drupal should use to authenticate with the Mailgun API.

The "user" in the [DSN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_source_name) is the API key.

##### US URL Example
```dotenv
MAILGUN_URL=https://key-1234567890abcdefghijklmnopqrstu@api.mailgun.net
```

##### EU URL Example
```dotenv
MAILGUN_URL=https://key-1234567890abcdefghijklmnopqrstu@api.eu.mailgun.net
```

#### PUBLIC
A string allowing the enabling/disabling of Shield module auth functionality.

If `true`, Shield will not be enabled.

If `false`, the username will be the [App Name](#app-name) & the password will
be the [Site Name](#site-name).

Note: _Make sure the "Enable Shield" checkbox is checked in Drupal & that config is committed._

#### SITES
A CSV list of Drupal "sites" (e.g. "subdomains") used by the given environment:

```dotenv
SITES=foo,bar,baz,qux
```

#### SALT
A string used for "one-time login links, cancel links, form tokens, etc."

[Best Practices Issue](https://www.drupal.org/project/drupal/issues/3107548)

Use `drush eval "var_dump(Drupal\Component\Utility\Crypt::randomBytesBase64(55))"` to generate one.

```dotenv
SALT=generatedSaltValue
```

#### SOLR_URL
The default Solr connection can be configured via a [DSN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_source_name):

```dotenv
SOLR_URL=http://localhost
```

This package makes several assumptions, which can be overridden via the `SOLR_URL` DSN. The DSN in the
example above is automatically expanded to:

```dotenv
SOLR_URL=http://default@localhost:8983#default
```

In the expanded example above, the `user` is the name of the Solr core & the `fragment` is the Drupal machine
name for the connection. Consider revising Solr core & Drupal Solr server machine names to `default`,
so the shorter DSN can be used.

Streamlined environment-dependent configuration of _one_ Solr core is supported at this time.

#### TRUSTED_HOST_PATTERNS
Optional. A CSV list of patterns specifying [trusted hosts](https://www.drupal.org/docs/installing-drupal/trusted-host-settings#s-protecting-in-drupal-8).

Start (`^`) & end (`$`) characters are added to every pattern, by default.

##### Fallback Functionality
If the `TRUSTED_HOST_PATTERNS` variable is _not_ set, this package will populate
Drupal's `trusted_host_patterns` array based on the values of [DOMAINS](#domains)
& [SITES](#sites) variables.

###### Examples
If you have `DOMAINS` set to `foo.example,bar.example`, the Drupal `trusted_host_patterns`
settings array would have the following values:

* `^foo\.example$`
* `^www\.foo\.example$`
* `^bar\.example$`
* `^www\.bar\.example$`

If you have `DOMAINS` set to `foo.example` & `SITES` set to `bar,baz,qux`, the
Drupal `trusted_host_patterns` setting array would have the following values:

* `^bar\.foo\.example$`
* `^baz\.foo\.example$`
* `^qux\.foo\.example$`

#### Terms

##### App Name
The machine name of the Drupal App (e.g. "default" or "earth").

##### Site Name
The site name for a Drupal App Site (e.g. "default" or "antarctica").

#### Configuration Conclusion
With these few Environment Variables, you will be able to configure Drupal in a streamlined
fashion similar to the way Symfony is configured. Support for many more common Drupal features
can be expected soon. Please consider creating a Pull Request with features you would like to
this package to support.

Commit message:

Adding support for `DATABASE_NAME` variables. Updating documentation & change log.

README.md, after:

# Environment-Based Drupal Settings
This package extends Symfony's [symfony/dotenv](https://symfony.com/components/Dotenv)
component to allow streamlined Drupal config via [Environment Variables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environment_variable).
Please refer to the Symfony component's documentation about how `.env` files
should be used. It is important to note that `.env` files are _ignored_ if the
`APP_ENV` var has already been set by the server. For performance purposes,
production environments should ideally rely on pre-configured environment variables,
rather than environment variable values loaded from `.env` files.

## Installation

`composer require unleashedtech/dotenv-drupal`

### Configuring Drupal
First, you'll need to configure Drupal to use this package.

#### Drupal Settings & Sites Files
Drupal is typically configured via `settings.php` files in various directories.
To use this package with Drupal, some code will need to be added to the top of
the relevant `settings.php` file(s):

```php
<?php
use UnleashedTech\Drupal\Dotenv\Dotenv;
$dotenv = $dotenv ?? new Dotenv();
$config = $dotenv->getConfig();
$databases = $dotenv->getDatabases();
$settings = $dotenv->getSettings();
```

##### Conditional Logic
If conditional logic is required for a given site, such logic is still supported.
This package will auto-load various `settings.{{environment}}.php`,
`config.{{environment}}.php` or `databases.{{environment}}.php` files, if they exist.
For instance, if you need to set a database prefix for staging, you can create
`databases.staging.php`:

```php
<?php
$databases['default']['default']['prefix'] = 'foo_';
```

Each included file only has the related variable in scope
(e.g. `config.dev.php` only has `$config` in scope).

##### Multi-Site Drupal
You can use the `default` settings file to provide base configuration for
a multi-site install:

```php
<?php
use UnleashedTech\Drupal\Dotenv\Dotenv;
$dotenv = new Dotenv();
$dotenv->setSiteName(basename(__DIR__));
require __DIR__ . '/../default/settings.php';
```

If you'd like, you can manually set the database name for each site via the
`setDatabaseName` method:

```php
<?php
use UnleashedTech\Drupal\Dotenv\Dotenv;
$dotenv = new Dotenv();
$dotenv->setSiteName(basename(__DIR__));
$dotenv->setDatabaseName('foo');
require __DIR__ . '/../default/settings.php';
```

###### Using the Multi-Site Default Site
If you need to use the `default` site as part of your multi-site install,
you can allow it by calling the `DotEnv::setMultiSiteDefaultSiteAllowed` method
in `default/settings.php`:

```php
<?php
use UnleashedTech\Drupal\Dotenv\Dotenv;
$dotenv = $dotenv ?? new Dotenv();
$dotenv->setMultiSiteDefaultSiteAllowed();
$config = $dotenv->getConfig();
$databases = $dotenv->getDatabases();
$settings = $dotenv->getSettings();
```

###### Sites Files
This package also provides functionality to configure Drupal's `$sites` variable
via `sites.php`. The `$sites` variable is built from data in the [DOMAINS](#domains)
& [SITES](#sites) environment variables. You will need to add the following code
to `sites.php`:

```php
<?php
use UnleashedTech\Drupal\Dotenv\Dotenv;
$dotenv = new Dotenv();
$sites = $dotenv->getSites();
```

#### Installation Conclusion
That's it! Drupal will now attempt to load essential connection information from
Environment Variables.

### Configuring Drupal via ENV Variables
This package will provide many default setting & configuration values based on the
detected environment. Some of these values can be populated by environment variables.

Environment variables can be set in `.env` files, or via modifying server configuration.
For production environments, environment variables should ideally be defined via server
configuration.

Multi-site installations often need config that differs from the default site.
This package first checks for variables following the `{{ app }}__{{ site }}__{{ var }}`
naming convention, before falling back to the `{{ var }}` naming convention.

You can provide site-specific information via namespaced environment variables.

* [DATABASE_URL](#database_url)
* [FILE_PUBLIC_PATH](#file_public_path)
* [FILE_PRIVATE_PATH](#file_private_path)
* [FILE_TEMP_PATH](#file_temp_path)
* [CONFIG_SYNC_PATH](#config_sync_path)
* [DOMAINS](#domains)
* [MAILGUN_URL](#mailgun_url)
* [PUBLIC](#public)
* [SALT](#salt)
* [SITES](#sites)
* [SOLR_URL](#solr_url)
* [TRUSTED_HOST_PATTERNS](#trusted_host_patterns)
* More configuration options coming soon!

#### DATABASE_URL
The default database connection can be configured via a [DSN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_source_name):

```dotenv
DATABASE_URL=driver://user:password@host:port/database
```

For example:

```dotenv
DATABASE_URL=mysql://foo:bar@localhost:3306/baz
```

For multi-site installations, do _not_ specify a database name nor credentials in
the `DATABASE_URL` variable:

```dotenv
DATABASE_URL=mysql://localhost:3306
```

For an "earth" Drupal App with a "default" site & an "antarctica" site:
```dotenv
DATABASE_URL=mysql://localhost:3306

EARTH__DEFAULT__DATABASE_USER=foo
EARTH__DEFAULT__DATABASE_PASSWORD=bar

EARTH__ANTARCTICA__DATABASE_USER=baz
EARTH__ANTARCTICA__DATABASE_PASSWORD=qux
```

The default Drupal [App Name](#app-name) is "default". For most use cases, you'll want to set the
Drupal [App Name](#app-name) in the default `settings.php` file, as shown below:
```php
<?php
use UnleashedTech\Drupal\Dotenv\Dotenv;
$dotenv = $dotenv ?? new Dotenv();
$dotenv->setAppName('earth');
// ...
```

The database name for a site can be overridden via definition of a `{{ app }}__{{ site }}__DATABASE_NAME`
environment variable:
```dotenv
EARTH__ANTARCTICA__DATABASE_NAME=ant
```

#### FILE_PUBLIC_PATH
Allows you to override the default `$settings['file_public_path']` value:

```dotenv
FILE_PUBLIC_PATH=sites/all/files
```

Drupal expects this path to be _relative_ to `DRUPAL_ROOT`.

#### FILE_PRIVATE_PATH
Allows you to override the default `$settings['file_private_path']` value:

```dotenv
FILE_PRIVATE_PATH=/private
```

#### FILE_TEMP_PATH
Allows you to override the default `$settings['file_temp_path']` value:

```dotenv
FILE_TEMP_PATH=/tmp
```

#### CONFIG_SYNC_PATH
Allows you to override the default `$settings['config_sync_path']` value:

```dotenv
CONFIG_SYNC_PATH=/sync
```

#### DOMAINS
A CSV list of domains used by the given environment:

```dotenv
DOMAINS=foo.example,bar.example,baz.example
```

#### MAILGUN_URL
The information Drupal should use to authenticate with the Mailgun API.

The "user" in the [DSN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_source_name) is the API key.

##### US URL Example
```dotenv
MAILGUN_URL=https://key-1234567890abcdefghijklmnopqrstu@api.mailgun.net
```

##### EU URL Example
```dotenv
MAILGUN_URL=https://key-1234567890abcdefghijklmnopqrstu@api.eu.mailgun.net
```

#### PUBLIC
A string allowing the enabling/disabling of Shield module auth functionality.

If `true`, Shield will not be enabled.

If `false`, the username will be the [App Name](#app-name) & the password will
be the [Site Name](#site-name).

Note: _Make sure the "Enable Shield" checkbox is checked in Drupal & that config is committed._

#### SITES
A CSV list of Drupal "sites" (e.g. "subdomains") used by the given environment:

```dotenv
SITES=foo,bar,baz,qux
```

#### SALT
A string used for "one-time login links, cancel links, form tokens, etc."

[Best Practices Issue](https://www.drupal.org/project/drupal/issues/3107548)

Use `drush eval "var_dump(Drupal\Component\Utility\Crypt::randomBytesBase64(55))"` to generate one.

```dotenv
SALT=generatedSaltValue
```

#### SOLR_URL
The default Solr connection can be configured via a [DSN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_source_name):

```dotenv
SOLR_URL=http://localhost
```

This package makes several assumptions, which can be overridden via the `SOLR_URL` DSN. The DSN in the
example above is automatically expanded to:

```dotenv
SOLR_URL=http://default@localhost:8983#default
```

In the expanded example above, the `user` is the name of the Solr core & the `fragment` is the Drupal machine
name for the connection. Consider revising Solr core & Drupal Solr server machine names to `default`,
so the shorter DSN can be used.

Streamlined environment-dependent configuration of _one_ Solr core is supported at this time.

#### TRUSTED_HOST_PATTERNS
Optional. A CSV list of patterns specifying [trusted hosts](https://www.drupal.org/docs/installing-drupal/trusted-host-settings#s-protecting-in-drupal-8).

Start (`^`) & end (`$`) characters are added to every pattern, by default.

##### Fallback Functionality
If the `TRUSTED_HOST_PATTERNS` variable is _not_ set, this package will populate
Drupal's `trusted_host_patterns` array based on the values of [DOMAINS](#domains)
& [SITES](#sites) variables.

###### Examples
If you have `DOMAINS` set to `foo.example,bar.example`, the Drupal `trusted_host_patterns`
settings array would have the following values:

* `^foo\.example$`
* `^www\.foo\.example$`
* `^bar\.example$`
* `^www\.bar\.example$`

If you have `DOMAINS` set to `foo.example` & `SITES` set to `bar,baz,qux`, the
Drupal `trusted_host_patterns` setting array would have the following values:

* `^bar\.foo\.example$`
* `^baz\.foo\.example$`
* `^qux\.foo\.example$`

#### Terms

##### App Name
The machine name of the Drupal App (e.g. "default" or "earth").

##### Site Name
The site name for a Drupal App Site (e.g. "default" or "antarctica").

#### Configuration Conclusion
With these few Environment Variables, you will be able to configure Drupal in a streamlined
fashion similar to the way Symfony is configured. Support for many more common Drupal features
can be expected soon. Please consider creating a Pull Request with features you would like to
this package to support.
